README.md, before:

# SolveMore
Handy scripts for examining Bionano Solve data

_Scripts have been validated for Bionano Solve v3.2, BNX format v.1.2 and SMAP format v0.7_

## **plotters**

This dir contains scripts for generating plots and figures. 

[**_bionano_ideogram_**](plotters/bionano_ideogram.R)

An R script that takes (a modified) Bionano alignment file (`*.xmap`) as input and generates an _ideogram_ of the data such that the overlaid colour intensity reflects the amount of genome maps aligned to the specific region. It requires a bed file of cytobands to set up the figure background (see a human example in `data/hg38_goldenpath_cytoBandIdeo.txt`). 
The input to the R script is a `bed` format of the `*.xmap`, which can be derived using the command: 
```sh
grep -v "^#" EXP_REFINEFINAL1.xmap | awk 'BEGIN{FS="\t";OFS="\t"}; {print $3, int($6), int($7)}' >  EXP_REFINEFINAL1.xmap_hg38.bed
```
The resulting `bed` can then be used as input to `bionano_ideogram`: 
```sh
bionano_ideogram.R hg38_goldenpath_cytoBandIdeo.txt EXP_REFINEFINAL1.xmap_hg38.bed ideogram.pdf
```
Example:  An example is presented as [Fig.1 in the 778 Gen. Res. paper](https://genome.cshlp.org/content/28/5/726.full#F1). 

[**_molecule_diagnostic_plots_**](plottes/molecule_diagnostic_plots.R)

A R script that takes the 0-channel data from a bnx file (v1.3) and generates a series of diagnostic plots on the molecule data. 
The input data can be obtained using a simple `grep`: 
```sh
grep "^0" all_sorted.bnx > all_sorted_0channel.txt
```
The resulting text file can then be used as input to `molecule_diagnostic_plots`: 
```sh
Rscript molecule_diagnostic_plots.R all_sorted_0channel.txt all_sorted_0channel_plots.pdf
```
Example:  As example is provided in [`data/molecule_diagnostic_plots.pdf`](data/molecule_diagnostic_plots.pdf)

[**_wgCNV_**](plotters/wgCNV.R)

A R script to plot genome-wide CNV profile, taken as the `fractionalCopyNumber` from `output/contigs/alignmolvref/copynumber/cnv_rcmap_exp.txt` of the Bionano Solve v3 Pipeline. 

_This script is here for historical reasons, as I don't think the plot is very informative...!_

## **manipulators**

This dir contains scripts for post-analysis and manipulation of Pipeline outputs. 

[**_tally_SVtypes.sh_**](manipulators/tally_SVtypes.sh)

A shell script to tally up the different SV types from a smap file, printing the two-column results to stdout. It correctly accounts for the double entries for each inversions. It does not discriminate (exclude) `_nbase`, `_common`, or `_segdup` types (filtering scripts can be used for this). 

```sh
tally_SVtypes.sh exp_refineFinal1_merged_filter_inversions.smap
insertions	11068
deletions	9182
duplications	80
inversions	213
intra-chr	23
inter-chr	84
TOTAL SV	20650
```

[**_filter_dualVAP_**](manipulators/filter_dualVAP.R)

A R script to filter the "raw" variants_combine_filters_vs_control_inMoleRefine1.smap file from a Dual-Sample VAP analysis, returing a reduced smap. In brief, SVs of types `_nbase`, `_common`, and `_segdup` are excluded, as are SVs failing Assembly Chimeric Score or not found in self-molecules, and insertions/deletions smaller than 500 bp in size. For inversions, only those where BOTH breakpoints pass inclusion criteria are returned. 

```sh
Rscript filter_dualVAP.R variants_combine_filters_vs_control_inMoleRefine1.smap filteredVAP.smap
```

Commit message:

filter_dualVAP works for single-sample VAP, so function has been renamed accordingly

README.md, after:

# SolveMore
Handy scripts for examining Bionano Solve data

_Scripts have been validated for Bionano Solve v3.2, BNX format v.1.2 and SMAP format v0.7_

## **plotters**

This dir contains scripts for generating plots and figures. 

[**_bionano_ideogram_**](plotters/bionano_ideogram.R)

An R script that takes (a modified) Bionano alignment file (`*.xmap`) as input and generates an _ideogram_ of the data such that the overlaid colour intensity reflects the amount of genome maps aligned to the specific region. It requires a bed file of cytobands to set up the figure background (see a human example in `data/hg38_goldenpath_cytoBandIdeo.txt`). 
The input to the R script is a `bed` format of the `*.xmap`, which can be derived using the command: 
```sh
grep -v "^#" EXP_REFINEFINAL1.xmap | awk 'BEGIN{FS="\t";OFS="\t"}; {print $3, int($6), int($7)}' >  EXP_REFINEFINAL1.xmap_hg38.bed
```
The resulting `bed` can then be used as input to `bionano_ideogram`: 
```sh
bionano_ideogram.R hg38_goldenpath_cytoBandIdeo.txt EXP_REFINEFINAL1.xmap_hg38.bed ideogram.pdf
```
Example:  An example is presented as [Fig.1 in the 778 Gen. Res. paper](https://genome.cshlp.org/content/28/5/726.full#F1). 

[**_molecule_diagnostic_plots_**](plottes/molecule_diagnostic_plots.R)

A R script that takes the 0-channel data from a bnx file (v1.3) and generates a series of diagnostic plots on the molecule data. 
The input data can be obtained using a simple `grep`: 
```sh
grep "^0" all_sorted.bnx > all_sorted_0channel.txt
```
The resulting text file can then be used as input to `molecule_diagnostic_plots`: 
```sh
Rscript molecule_diagnostic_plots.R all_sorted_0channel.txt all_sorted_0channel_plots.pdf
```
Example:  As example is provided in [`data/molecule_diagnostic_plots.pdf`](data/molecule_diagnostic_plots.pdf)

[**_wgCNV_**](plotters/wgCNV.R)

A R script to plot genome-wide CNV profile, taken as the `fractionalCopyNumber` from `output/contigs/alignmolvref/copynumber/cnv_rcmap_exp.txt` of the Bionano Solve v3 Pipeline. 

_This script is here for historical reasons, as I don't think the plot is very informative...!_

## **manipulators**

This dir contains scripts for post-analysis and manipulation of Pipeline outputs. 

[**_tally_SVtypes.sh_**](manipulators/tally_SVtypes.sh)

A shell script to tally up the different SV types from a smap file, printing the two-column results to stdout. It correctly accounts for the double entries for each inversions. It does not discriminate (exclude) `_nbase`, `_common`, or `_segdup` types (filtering scripts can be used for this). 

```sh
tally_SVtypes.sh exp_refineFinal1_merged_filter_inversions.smap
insertions	11068
deletions	9182
duplications	80
inversions	213
intra-chr	23
inter-chr	84
TOTAL SV	20650
```

[**_filterVAP_**](manipulators/filterVAP.R)

A R script to filter the "raw" variants_combine_filters_vs_control_inMoleRefine1.smap file from a VAP analysis, returing a reduced smap. In brief, SVs of types `_nbase`, `_common`, and `_segdup` are excluded, as are SVs failing Assembly Chimeric Score or not found in self-molecules, and insertions/deletions smaller than 500 bp in size. For inversions, only those where BOTH breakpoints pass inclusion criteria are returned. 

Script is compatible with SMAP File Version 0.7 and has been tested for Single-Sample and Dual-Sample VAP outputs (it will probably work for Trio-VAP analysis smap outputs, but it hasn't been tested yet).

```sh
Rscript filterVAP.R variants_combine_filters_vs_control_inMoleRefine1.smap filteredVAP.smap
```
